---
layout: post
categories: blogpost
title: Pictures
excerpt: They certainly exist
---

I was never one to take many pictures. I was not very agreeable when being asked to take a picture, either. I didn't smile very much as a kid, which my classmates at the time informed me was something you had to do in order to not ruin a picture (although their way of saying this was: "Daniel, you completely ruined the class photo."). I never took selfies when those became a thing, and the one time someone from school did ask me to take a selfie, I shrunk away from them as though they had the plague.

I take a lot more pictures now than I used to. This is pretty easy, since the number of pictures I took of my own accord prior to high school is approximately zero. I'm still not totally sure how I feel about pictures. They're records of time, methods of proof ("pics or it didn't happen"), memories, data. Some of us probably take too many of them, and others probably take too few.

Pictures are fake and very real. They're Instagram: you, frozen in time, smile on your face with delicious-looking avocado toast just larger than your palm, the sun shining on your back and illuminating the majestic mountain you obviously just climbed. They are a snapshot, a veil disguising the despised uncertainty, failure, and troubles of your life from everyone except you.

They are your mom's favorite baby photo of you: a candid, raw depiction of you when you could barely talk, walk, take derivatives, think about the photo of you that was about to exist and what it was for. They are rife with meaning, leaving you brimming with the emotions, thoughts, and ideas that once accompanied you in the time and location of the photo. They record you--each wrinkle as it claims its territory on your face, each hair as it sheds its luster, each number as it represents a distance between you and the day of your birth.

I'm sure there's a good reason that "a picture is worth a thousand words" became a cliché. But I'd consider changing it a little. We can't understand the world, live our lives, and tell our stories with words alone. Even the stories of old that get passed for generations, I'm sure, are accompanied by little additions: "Papa always used to crinkle his right eye when he told this part." Even the words are not merely words: they are infused with experience, meaning, bias, love, hatred--the words are their speaker as much as they are themselves.

Similarly, a photo blisters with meaning that cannot be captured even by a thousand words, or two thousand. A photo invites us into a world that is ours or not ours. It offers a small glimpse into a reality that once existed, a place we might like to see more of, a moment we wish had never happened, a person we would love to meet. It grasps our heart, speaks to us from within our own bodies.

But just as words are not parts that can sum to a picture, a picture cannot supplant words. All forms of expression have their limits, and those limits certainly interact. We talk of "painting pictures with words" and less often of "writing essays with pictures." Words advise the mind in its creation of imagery; pictures--polished, prepared--call on it to find the words to question, speak, describe.

I think I have yet to develop a healthier relationship with pictures (at least, when they're not moving). I take lots of pictures of food, landscapes, books (really?), sights, but don't feature myself much. I hope that'll change, because I think pictures have a wonderful evocative power that allows us to relive moments in life, offering us a door that would be far more difficult to open any other way. I suppose I'll find out whether I'll do anything about that hope. 
