---
layout: post
categories: blogpost
title: America Reawakens- The Mall
excerpt: What will the pandemic do to malls?
---

It was a trip to Sichuan Impression in the San Gabriel Valley when I first realized
something was on its way. I'd heard scary tales from China and rumors of a case or
two from inside Claremont's bubble and seen a few people with masks, but the brewing
storm that brought us our present situation didn't begin to seem real until I found
my forehead being scanned by a strange device before being allowed to enter the restaurant.

I left with my tongue burning, but my taste buds were soon placated by two
well-chosen ice cream scoops from Salt & Straw. Unfortunately, our administration's
response to our present situation has been much less soothing for our country
than that smooth, chunky scoop of Almond Brittle and Salted Ganache was for my
taste buds.

And so, the shutdowns came. I had planned to drive home for Spring Break early,
but didn't expect the darkness that would envelop our campus in the preceding week.
The day before I was set to leave, we'd heard how colleges across the country were
already shifting to completing their semesters or quarters online. My philosophy
professor had informed us that Claremont McKenna was having its professors learn
how to use Zoom in the event that they had to make a quick transition.

When that fateful email finally arrived at Tuesday lunch, I was sitting at my
former dorm's table in the dining hall. This was frankly expected everywhere on
campus: one of my professors had told us about an emergency faculty meeting, our
administration seemed convinced that the coronavirus was going to arrive in
Claremont, and... one of my friends had just opened an email from Scripps College
that contained roughly the same words everyone else in that dining hall was about
to read from their phones.

I'm not certain if there was actually a cloud cover that day, but I remember a
palpable change across the entire dining hall when that email arrived--it truly
seemed darker, and the tension was clear. I, for my part, realized that I was going
to have to say all my goodbyes between that afternoon and the next.

Soon after I made it home, our state's stay at home order went into effect and
restaurants shut down, the mall closed, and life began to feel quieter. Seth Meyers
began perfecting the art of the segue from his attic, Hasan Minhaj showed us how
he uses his children during his home workouts, and John Oliver continued to make
sexual overtures to Adam Driver from a screening room very much like the screening
room he already used for his show.

Now, about two months later, things have started to open up. I visited the mall
for the first time since the stay at home orders went into place yesterday, and
it was a very different experience. Nordstrom, now technically open, was only
allowing shoppers in _by appointment_. Many other shops, such as Neiman Marcus
and Macy's, were letting shoppers in as normal. Burberry, Louis Vuitton and co.
seemed to have followed Gucci's cue in making shoppers wait outside in a line
to limit the flow of customers.

Another store had left a note for UPS: "We had to close up early today! - Ted's
Team"--excuse me for forgetting that I was standing in front of Ted Baker and not
reading about a team run by some guy named Ted. I found myself peeved by the
number of teens with _no masks to be seen anywhere_ standing in front of Pac Sun
and running around department stores and _clearly not even trying to socially
distance_.

One of the biggest surprises: a number of the stalls in the center of the mall
that serve as home bases for those people who try to accost you with whatever
smoke- or magic-producing thing they're trying to sell you were open again. Even
worse, they were at it again, bereft of masks and brandishing their products at
shoppers as they violated people's 6-foot bubbles.

A mall is a place where you can experience the range of socioeconomic class in
an area: you'll find people frantically snooping for bargains in Dillards, others
strolling through Versace as though they have nothing else to do that day, and
just about everything in between. As recently as [last year](https://www.dailykos.com/stories/2019/11/27/1901730/-The-slow-death-of-the-American-mall-and-the-social-imperfections-it-exhibited),
news sources have been reporting on the death of these "cathedrals to capitalism."

Meanwhile, malls like the SGV's [Westfield Santa Anita](https://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-santa-anita-westfield-mall-20170331-story.html) have been attempting to salvage the ruins by
targeting their locales with such delicacies as Din Tai Fung, Somi Somi, Hainan
Chicken, literally everything matcha, and that jiggly Japanese cheesecake you've
seen everywhere (for the record, it's actually pretty good)--all juxtaposed with
the shops you know and love (Like?... Hate? If you're walking around with boba
in your hand and have nothing to do, you _know_ you'll end up in one of those shops
anyway).

But if the death of the mall began as symptomatic of trends such as socio-economic
decline and the ubiquity of online shopping, one is left to wonder how the post-
pandemic world will be disposed towards these homes of "first jobs and blind dates...
where goths and grandmothers could somehow walk through the same doors and find
something they all liked" ([TIME](https://time.com/4865957/death-and-life-shopping-mall/)).

If there's one economic lesson we've learned from the pandemic, it's that times
like these are a boon for companies like Amazon, the cold, impersonal, efficient
middlemen who bury the world beneath your left-click button. If the internet and
socio-economic issues were the harbinger of doom for malls in the first place,
then it seems like the mall's true death knell is not out of the world of
possibility. Add to these issues the new friction shoppers will have to endure by
scheduling appointments to shop or waiting in line to enter stores they used to
wander through without looking up from their phones, and the tomb seems to be
digging itself.
