---
layout: post
categories: blogpost
title: Wasting Time
excerpt: Semi-coherent thoughts
---

As a kid, I must have had an inexhaustible set of tools with which to waste my time. Whether it was playing an MMORPG, watching a Pokémon movie I'd probably already watched five times, or staring at my phone, my time disappeared in droves. Even through high school, I don't believe I valued the time I had as much as it deserved (although, to be fair, some of that time lost in high school had to do with depression, but that's for another time!).

As I spent time in college, I came to realize how precious and fleeting time is. Whether it's time spent studying and building your career, with the people you love, or even relaxing, its ceaseless march can't be controlled by any of our efforts. We have no control over the time given to us--its quantity or its quality--but we can decide how we spend it. It may have been part and parcel of being at a school like Mudd, but I began to develop a philosophy of not wasting a second. I had to be studying, reading, learning, exercising, or doing something productive every moment I possibly could. I _could_ spend some time to relax, but I'd already wasted that time back in high school.

While it numbers among them, the pandemic isn't the only reason that I've decided the ceaseless rush isn't a proper way to live. While I was fortunate enough during college to discover that I had a genuine love for the field I was studying and I did, to an extent, enjoy pushing myself, I don't believe life is to be spent with a sole focus on one's career. I've watched it turn my dad into someone I feel I barely know, who is always either working, eating, watching TV, or sleeping.

The push to spend a great deal of one's spare time, weekday or weekend, on side projects and "career-boosting" activities has been well-documented, especially in CS. I've been fortunate to meet some genuinely passionate people who actually enjoy spending a lot of their free time writing package managers and tinkering with their computers. I myself enjoy spending free time learning about new topics or _trying_ to write something interesting, but perhaps not to the same extent.

In balancing my career interests with other activities, I've given myself a lot of grief over "wasting" time, especially for entertainment. Relaxing in the ways one knows how is certainly a productive endeavor. As with most things, there are limits--I tested some of these during high school. But categorial dismissal of a particular activity as a waste of time is just about as conducive to a healthy mindset as banishing certain foods as "evil." I spend my time away from the text editor in plenty of ways, some more "productive" than others. But each of them plays a vital role in helping me develop a productive, healthy, and sustainable life.

I think the key point here is maintaining a sustainable lifestyle. I've met people who do seem to have a superhuman capacity for work, and I've met people who exercised that same capacity until it caused them to burn out. I feel skeptical that those levels of workaholism are sustainable indefinitely, but what I know with certainty is that they detract from leading a well-rounded and fulfilling life. While one's career is probably where they will make the most "impact" and generate the most "value", life as a whole is a limited block of time, and it should be enjoyed when possible.

I certainly intend to do everything in my power to pursue a career where I find enjoyment and value. But what I hope I'll stick to is finding value _outside_ of my career aspirations, and allowing myself time for "wasteful" entertainment. I think humanity in general thrives because we have a natural curiosity, because we seek to be together, and because we eternally seek meaning. That search for meaning, for togetherness, and for answers has led to many of mankind's greatest creations, and I think life is best lived exposing oneself to those creations and searching for those answers. I think entertainment has productive value when engaged with purposefully. I've found a lot of joy and meaning in certain pieces of entertainment, but I think this can be easier to come by when I make sure I'm finding something I enjoy and giving it my full attention.

I'll probably continue to waste time as I age, and probably a lot of that time will be used for entertainment (although probably, and hopefully, not as much as in my younger years--wow, I'm already talking like I'm old). I fault myself less for it because I think it's an important ingredient as one goes through life. I don't believe it makes me less worthy of pursuing my career--I hope to be both a passionate researcher and a passionate person. But to be a passionate person, I also need to let myself live and enjoy the life I'm trying to build. It's not so bad, once in a while, to step back and smell the roses you've planted. 
