In Patrick Deneen’s _Why Liberalism Failed_, he immediately sets out a contradictory perspective of liberalism: that liberalism, by way of its own success, achieves 
the precise opposite of its very goals. Deneen identifies a number of areas in which this occurs, but two that ring interesting, and relevant for me, are those of 
education and science/technology. Deneen describes a survivalist meritocracy, in which the younger generations have no other choice but to be “cynical participants 
in a system that ruthlessly produces winners and losers,” spending every waking moment trying to get to the top or face the possibility of falling into a bottomless 
pit (11). At the same time, students are encouraged to pursue STEM while we bear witness to “the headlong evacuation of the liberal arts” and adopt “the educational 
form that was reserved for those who were deprived of freedom” (13).
  
I went to a college that promised two things: a rigorous STEM education and a liberal arts background. Among those who have heard of Harvey Mudd College, it is well 
known that the school insists its students are schooled in the basics of every discipline it offers: mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, engineering, and 
computer science. Simultaneously, Mudd touts its status as a liberal arts school and its hope to give students a well-rounded education, requiring each student to 
pursue a four-course “concentration” in a non-STEM field (ironically, many students choose Economics for this minor) and to sample courses from at least five 
different areas of the humanities. 

But does it truly achieve its purpose? To my mind, the purpose of a liberal arts education is to give one the tools to be a complete human being: not merely a 
computer programmer or chemistry researcher, but a scientist/engineer/what-have-you who also appreciates the value of classical literature, of music, of the study 
of foreign language. At the same time, in an almost Aristotelean sense, such a well-rounded person, in my view, also recognizes the need for a “leisure” of sorts, 
purposed to the consideration of ideas and to reflection. 
	
For its students, at least, Mudd offers no such luxury. For three often grueling semesters, the Core curriculum leaves students with little time of their own. 
Humanities classes are frequently chosen for ease and as a respite from the demands of a relentless march of problem sets and exams throughout the semester. In my 
case, at least, there was little opportunity for reflection on or enjoyment of what I was learning. 

Besides this, many aspects of Mudd’s culture made me feel guilty for spending what extra time I did have reading books rather than studying for programming 
interviews or doing side projects. Indeed, the tech culture I have been initiated into, and Harvey Mudd as a microcosm of that culture, valorize the “rise and 
grind” mentality that demands we spend every waking moment doing something “productive” and brag about our sleep deprivation. 

These aspects of culture are regrettable, but are they, in fact, symptoms of liberalism? To Deneen, science and technology are accomplices in humanity’s attempt to 
free itself from the tyranny of nature, a series of battles culminating in “elements of what we today call our environmental crisis,” which signal “battles won but 
a war being lost” (14). Deneen says that the advance of science and technology as a proxy for civilizational progress has not only created the climate crisis we 
face today, but also subjugated us to the devices and technology that promised us liberation and “expression of our true selves” (15). While many students at 
Harvey Mudd are willing to consider the impact of their work on society, I did not see nearly as many conversations about the number of alumni who went to work at 
certain tech companies as about defense contractors. While I don't think these conversations should be necessarily centered around criticism, I do think having
students spend more time considering the sort of impact they would like to have is beneficial.

Perhaps aspects of liberalism did open the space for many of the innovations that now beleaguer us from every direction. The individualistic instinct that Deneen 
ascribes to it certainly has been a bedrock for the culture in places like Silicon Valley, where it feels like every person wants to create a startup and 
relationships seem to be more transactional than genuine. Deneen describes liberalism’s view of humans as “rights-bearing individuals who could fashion and pursue 
for themselves their own version of the good life” (1). In a field like technology, I find, the most ubiquitous version of the “good life” seems to be securing a 
job at Google—hardly seems to be an individualized creed. 

I can see the beginnings of how Deneen might ascribe these various ills to liberalism’s pursuit of its ends, but as what I’ve written so far likely demonstrates, 
the argument isn’t yet complete. I’m interested to see how he connects the dots. 
