---
layout: post
categories: blogpost
title: A Garden of Words
excerpt: Because why not keep a running list of your favorite quotations?
---

Before I lose my roughed-up copy of _Swann's Way_ somewhere, I should probably do myself a favor and backup my favorite selections of those lovely words. I'll collect more here with time, but I'm hoping this'll remind me of my favorite bits and give me fun ideas--hopefully, recording similes and turns of phrase from people much better at writing than I am can put me on the right track.

I think Proust himself puts this best:
> What does it matter thenceforth if the actions, and the emotions, of this new order of creatures seem to us true, since we have made them ours, since it is within us that they occur, that they hold within their control, as we feverishly turn the pages of the book, the rapidity of our breathing and the intensity of our gaze. And once the novelist has put us in that state, in which, as in all purely internal states, every emotion is multiplied tenfold, in which his book will disturb us as might a dream but a dream more lucid than those we have while sleeping and whose memory will last longer, then see how he provokes in us within one hour all possible happiness and all possible unhappiness just a few of which we would spend years of our lives coming to know and the most intense of which woudl never be revealed to us because the slowness with which they occur prevents us from perceiving them (thus our heart changes, in life, and it is the worst pain; but we do know it is only through reading, through our imagination: in reality it changes, as certain natural phenomena occur, slowly enough so that, if we are able to observe successively each of its different states, in return we are spared the actual sensation of change) (_Swann's Way_, 87).

## From _Swann's Way_, by Marcel Proust:

Proust can be a bit of a drag, but such a savory one. Descriptions can become extremely long-winded and you'll find that you've spent 20 pages reading about something that happened as someone was lifting a teacup. But his volumes are really touching--they get to you in a really personal way. Each of them is a story riddled with magnificiently-put observations that don't feel philosophical but do display what a keen observer Proust is of the human condition.

> A thousand small useless details--the charming prodigality of the pharmacist--that would have been eliminated in an artificial preparation gave me, like a book in which one is amazed to encounter the name of a person one knows, the pleasure of realizing that these were actually stems of real lime blossoms, like those I saw in the avenue de la Gare, altered precisely because they were not duplicates but themselves, and becaues they had aged (52).

> These were the events taking place in the book I was reading; it is true that the people affected by them were not "real"... But all the feelings we are made to experience by the joy or misfortune of a real person are produced in us only through the intermediary of an image of that joy or that misfortune; the ingeniousness of the first novelist consisted in understanding that in the apparatus of our emotions, the image being the only essential element, the simplification that would consist in purely and simply abolishing real people would be a decisive improvement. A real human being, however profoundly we sympathize with him, is in large part perceived by our senses, that is to say, remains opaque to us, presents a dead weight whcih our sensibility cannot lift. If a calamity should strike him, it is only in a small part of the total notion we have of him that we will be able to be moved by this; even more, it is only in a part of the total notion he has of himself that he will be able to be moved himself. The novelist's happy discovery was to have the idea of replacing these parts, inseparable to the soul, by an equal quantity of immaterial parts, that is to say, parts which  our soul can assimilate (86-87).

> "Monsieur, I absolutely cannot tell you if it has been raining. I live so resolutely beyond physical contingencies that my senses do not bother to notify me of them." (94)

I don't think there's anything "deep" or particularly insightful about this one, but this bit from a conversation between the narrator's father and friend Bloch is probably one of the funniest lines I've ever read in a book. You can almost imagine Bloch's deadpan face as he's saying this. There's a wonderful juxtaposition between the utter stupidity of what he's saying and the somehow marvelously crafted words he's using to clothe the thought.

> but what delighted me were the asparagus, steeped in ultramarine and pink, whose tips, delicately painted with little strokes of mauve and azure, shade off imperceptibly down to their feet--still soiled though they are from the dirt of their garden bed--with an iridescence that is not of these earth. It seemed to me that these celestial hues revealed the delicious creatures who had merrily metamorphosed themselves into vegetables and who, through the disguise of their firm, edible flesh, disclosed in these early tints of dawn, in these beginnings of rainbows, in this extinction of blue evenings, the precious essence that I recognized again when, all night long following dinner at which I had eaten them, they played, in farces as crude and poetic as a fairy play by Shakespeare, at changing my chamber pot into a jar of perfume (123-124).

Proust somehow manages to make asparagus sound more tasty and beautiful and appealing than anything I could ever hope to cook. I really love how he transitions into personifying the aspargus--they're at once beautiful, celestial beings and merry, mischevious creatures. "Jar of perfume" is probably the nicest way you could describe the gas asparagus gives you :)

> But at the name of Guermantes, I saw a little brown notch appear in the center of each of our friend's blue eyes as if they had been stabbed by invisible pinpoints, while the rest of the pupil reacted by secreting floods of azure. The arc of his eyelids darkened and drooped. And his mouth, marked by a bitter fold, but recovering more quickly, smiled while his eyes remained sorrowful, like the eyes of a handsome martyr whose body bristles with arrows (130)

What I loved about this bit was the way it feels as if Legrandin's eyes are something as monumental, as large, as impactful as an ocean. There are certainly writers who manage to deploy simile (Homer) and plain old description to great effect, but there's almost a larger-than-life feel to what's going on in Legrandin's face here. Also a fan of how the narrator, by mentioning the name Guermantes to Legrandin, "was assuming a sort of power over [the name], by the mere fact of bringing it out of [his] daydreams and giving it an objective existence in the world of sound" (130).

> but even in his most artificial creations, man is still working upon nature; certain places will always impose their own particular empire on their surroundings, hoist their immemorial insignia in the middle of a park just as they would have done far from any human intervention, in a solitude which returns to surround them wherever they are, arising from the exigencies of the position they occupy and superimposed on the work of human hands (139).

Nature is a boss. There's simultaneously something soothing and trivializing about this observation: that certain places have such a strong imprint that they will assert themselves without our help. Whether that be building a monument or house or making it look "prettier" in some other fashion, it's really the personality of that part of nature that shines, with or without our help. But it also seems a little arrogant to think otherwise.

> But at the age, already a little disillusioned, which Swann was approaching, at which one knows how to content oneself with being in love for the pleasure of it without requiring too much reciprocity, this closeness of two hearts, if it is no longer, as it was in one's earliest youth, the goal toward which love necessarily tends, still remains linked to it by an association of ideas so strong that it may become the cause of love, if it occurs first. At an earlier time one dreamed of possessing the heart of the woman with whom one was in love; later, to feel that one possesses a woman's heart may be enough to make one fall in love with her (204).

This sounds like something I'd really only fully understand if I were getting to the Swann's age. Maybe for another decade! This, and a few below, are some nice bits from the ensconced novella "Swann in Love", which is always introduced as a tale of sexual jealousy. Indeed, Swann falls deeply, inexplicably in love with a woman named Odette who is able to draw from within him a passion of absurd proportions.

> [Dr. Cottard] and Mme. Cottard, however, with a kind of good sense which is also possessed by certain people from humble backgrounds, carefully refrained from offering an opinion or feigning admiration for a sort of music which they confessed to each other, once they were back home, they did not understand any more than the painting of "Monsieur Biche." Since, of the charm, the grace, the forms of nature, the public knows only what it has absorbed from the clichés of an art slowly assimilated, and since and original artist begins by rejecting those clichés, M. and Mme. Cottard, being in this sense typical of the public, found neither in Vinteuil's sonata, nor in the painter's portraits, what for them created the harmony of music and the beauty of painting. It seemed to them when the pianist played the sonata that he was randomly attaching to the piano notes that were not in fact connected to the forms they were used to, and that the painter was randomly hurling colors onto his canvases (221).

> Of all the modes by which love is brought into being, of all the agents which disseminate the holy evil, surely one of the most efficacious is this great gust of agitation which now and then sweeps over us. Then our fate is sealed, and the person whose company we enjoy at the time is the one we will love. It is not even necessary for us to have liked him better than anyone else up to then, or even as much. What is necessary is that our predilection for him should become exclusive. And that condition is fulfilled when--at a moment like this, when we do not have him with us--the quest for the pleasures that his charm gave us is suddenly replaced in us by an anxious need whose object is this person himself, an absurd need which the laws of this world make it impossible to satisfy and difficult to cure--the senseless and painful need to possess him (239).

> But as soon as he heard it, the little phrase [from Vinteuil] had the power to open up within him the space it needed, the proportions of Swann's soul were changed by it; a margin was reserved in him for a bliss that also did not correspond to any external object, and yet, instead of being purely individual, like the enjoyment of that love, assumed for Swann a reality superior to that of concrete things (245).

This bit's on Swann's affection for Odette and its unmerited attachment to the Vinteuil sonata. Even played by unskilled fingers, this passage has the ability to conjure such strong emotion in him.

> Swann immediately recognized this statement as one of those fragments of true fact with which liars, when caught unprepared, console themselves by introducing into the composition of the falsehood they are inventing, believing they can accomodate it there and steal its resemblance to the Truth (288).

Getting out of Swann's story of jealousy, _Swann's Way_ concludes with a section called "Place-Names: The Name."

> Words present us wit little pictures of things, clear and familiar, like those that are hung on the walls of schools to give children an example of what a workbench is, a bird, an anthill, things conceived of as similar to all others of the same sort. But names present a confused image of people--and of towns, which they accustom us to believe are individual, unique like people--an image which derives from them, from the brightness or darkness of their tone, the color with which it is painted uniformly, like one of those posters, entirely blue or entirely red, in which, because of the limitations of the process used or by a whim of the designer, not only the sky and the sea are blue or erd, but the boats, the church, the people in the streets (403-404).

Do you ever hear the name Champs-Élysées ("Elysian Fields") and think of the most blissful park you could imagine? You can walk down the actual street and see the hubbub of tourists, the Five Guys well-placed on one side, and the general not-godlike-ness of the whole thing (although, if we're talking about the Greek gods, they do seem to be presented as more human-like than we are at times).

## From _In the Shadow of Young Girls in Flower_, by Marcel Proust:

> Think, however, of so many writers who, in a moment of dissatisfaction with a piece they have just written, may read a eulogy of the genius of Chateaubriand, or who may think of some other great artist whom they have dreamed of equaling, who hum to themselves a phrase of Beethoven for instance, comparing the sadness of it to the mood they have tried to capture in their prose, and are then so carried away by the perception of genius that they let it affect the way they read their own piece, no longer seeing it as they first saw it, but going so far as to hazard an act of faith in the value of it, by telling themselves, "It's not bad, you know!" without realizing that the sum total which determines their ultimate satisfaction includes the memory of Chateaubriand's brilliant pages, which they have assimilated to their own, but which, of course, they did not write (54).

> Therein lies the source of the melancholy that accompanies our discovery of such works, as of all things which can  come to fruition only through time. When I came eventually to have access to the most secret parts of Vinteuil's sonata, everything in itthat I had noticed and preferred at first was already beginning to be lost to me, carried away by habit out of the  reach of my sensibility. Because it was only in successive stages that I could love what the sonata brought to me, I was never able to possess it in its entirety--it was an image of life. But the great works of art are also less of a disappointment than life, in that their best parts do not come first (105).

> When reality coincides at last with something we have longed for, fitting perfectly with our dreams, it can cover them up entirely and become indistinguishable from them, as two symmetrical figures placed against one another seem to become one; whereas, so as to give our joy its full intensity of meaning, we would actually prefer every detail of our desires, even at the instant of their fulfillment, to retain the prestige of still being immaterial, so as to be more certian that this really is what we desired. The mind is not even at liberty to remake its own earlier state, so as to compare it with the present one: the new acquaintance we have just made, the memory of those first, unexpected moments, the words we have heard spoken, blocking the entrance to our consciousness, and commanding the exits from meomry much more than those from imagination, act backward against our past, which we can no longer see without their presence in it, rather than acting forward on the still-unoccupied shape of our future (112).

> Names are of course fanciful designers; the sketches they draw of people and places are such poor likenesses that we are often struck dumb when, instead of the world as we have imagined it, we are suddenly confronted by the world as we see it (which is not the real world, of course, as the senses are not much better at likenesses than the imagination; so we end up with approximate drawings of reality, which are at least as different from the seen world as the seen world is from the imagined world) (123).

On the narrator's somewhat disturbing realization that the painter Bergotte, to whom the narrator has attached a particular, fanciful idea, is not quite what he imagined.

> For we are always (or so I thought then) detached from the other person: while we love, we are aware that our love does not bear her name, that we may feel it again in the future--or might even have felt it in the past--for someone other than her; and at times when we are not in love, it is precisely because our feelings are unaffected by it that we find it easy to be philosophical toward the contradictoriness of love, that we can speak such untroubled words about it, because we have no consciousness of it at that moment, knowledge in this being intermittent and not outliving the effective presence of this emotion (187).

> The bad babit of speaking of oneself and one's faults should not go without mention of its corollary, the habit of criticizing in others faults closely analogous to our own. These are always the ones we choose to speak of, as though this were an unobtrusive way of speaking of ourselves, one that adds to the pleasure of self-forgiveness the pleasure of confession (324).

> We may converse our whole life away without speaking anything other than the interminable repetitions that fill the vacant minute; but the steps of thought we take during the lonely work of artistic creation all lead us downward, deeper into ourselves, the only direction that is not closed to us, the only direction in which we can advance, albeit with much greater travail, toward an outcome of truth (485).
