---
layout: post
categories: blogpost
title: The Audacity of Equality
excerpt: Something I keep thinking about
---

In his first Netflix special, _Homecoming King_, Hasan Minhaj pointed out something about our generation that has stuck with me, and I'm sure with many others around my age as well. Many of us US-born desis whose parents immigrated here grew up with starkly different experiences from those of our predecessors. We grew up in a first-world country, free from, and sometimes blind to, many of the obvious problems in the countries our families came from. The difference in quality of life was so great that it drove our parents to do everything in their power to make it here.

And they continue to do that. In Hasan's words, the story for our parents was one of survival. It was enough for our parents to merely _be_ here, living in, what was for many of them, "the greatest country in the world." But our generation, having lived our entire lives in that country, is far more attuned to and less willing to put up with the inequalities that confront us. From the Model Minority myth to Islamophobia, we've had our share of discriminatory experiences. And many of us want an even better life for ourselves: we have the "audacity" to fight for our own equality.

It's an interesting position, being the son of two immigrants with little to no foothold in this country. In my field, I'm not even a minority. In fact, it often feels as though _most_ of the tech industry is dominated by South Asian men (although probably more Indian than Pakistani). I certainly have a lot of "people who look like me" to look up to, but I don't feel "at home" or "welcome" despite that representation. This is certainly something I've long thought about and expressed, but not something I expect to change.

I often suspect that my personal battles will be less racial in tone than they once were. I dealt with my share of overt racism and bullying through elementary and middle school--when we kids were too immature to do and say these things more subtly. Indeed, our nation is still scourged by an epidemic of misinformation--Muslims continue to be painted as terrorists and we, as a country, seem to have as much understanding of the other countries we share the planet with as of the other species.

But most of us do know enough not to be assholes to each other. So I feel fortunate that, as far as I can conceptualize, many of my battles ahead will be internal. They will be difficult and draining, but I will fight them with the knowledge and thankfulness of the privilege I do have. While I don't feel quite "at home" just yet, and I know it will be a long time before anything in my life is settled, I feel immensely thankful for everything I do have: my citizenship, my family, the roof over my head, my books, my sight, my hearing, my ability to talk and speak and turn in circles and pick things up. 
