---
layout: post
categories: blogpost
title: Attempts at Poetry
excerpt: Why do a code dump when you can do a heart dump?
---

I write (bad) poetry sometimes! I'll get around to recording myself reading it at some point, but in the meantime I figured I'd dump what I'm writing somewhere. I mostly mess around with free-verse but I'm trying out some actual styles. You'll find a few attempts at mondo, addressed to various things, below.


### To Trees

Why do you not complain
when we fell your brothers?
The tree waves me away
with a sigh.


Could you, too, read
the words we print on you?
I can't hear the stump's reply

What do you know
from your years of age?
The redwood
demands my fealty


Does your mother
lecture you too?
Tree sapling basks
in a taller friend's shade


### Sky

Why do we
scattered like seeds
think ourselves Gods?

My bed of clouds
wafts me away
from luminous towers


### Sea

Your fridge is empty
Do you not eat?
Waves stand rebuffed
a rude glacier


### Asparagus

Is there a secret
to your celestial hue
your firm, lovely skin
how you stare down my palate
which returns its lustful gaze?
My plate of vegetables
abandons its garden bed
of caked dirt
assembles crude farces
like a smiling ring of faries



### If you know what you're doing (very very very early draft)

My teacher, on that ruinous precipice that is the day before a test, passed on to us a sage piece of advice. He said, "it's easy if you know what you're doing."

If you want to win a game of soccer, simply kick the ball into the other team's goal. If they have the ball, don't let them kick it into yours.

It's easy if you know what you're doing.

If you want to dance well, just move the right parts of your body at the right times. Make it flow with the music. Don't look awkward.

It's easy if you know what you're doing.

If you want to ace a class, just show up, do the homework, get things right on the tests. Maybe knock out a project or two.

It's easy if you know what you're doing.

If you want to make more friends, just be more interesting and outgoing. Say things people want to listen to and make sure they remember you.

It's easy if you know what you're doing.

If you want to get strong and lean, just work out and eat healthy. Also, make sure you're eating enough. Also, work out more than you're already working out. But don't work out _too_ much. And make sure you're getting the right amount of protein, but not skimping on the carbs. The fats, too, they're important. Make sure that protein is a gram per pound of bodyweight. Or maybe it's lean body mass...?

It's easy if you know what you're doing.

If you want to become President of the United States, just win a few elections.

It's easy if you know what you're doing.

If you want to get over imposter syndrome, just remember that other people are probably feeling the same thing. Just get good at something. Do something you can be proud of.

It's easy if you know what you're doing.

If you want to quit a bad habit, just stop engaging in the habit for a while. Soon enough, you won't even want to do it anymore.

It's easy if you know what you're doing.

If you want to love yourself more, just find the things about yourself that you like and focus on those things. Quit criticizing yourself.

It's easy if you know what you're doing.

If you want to lose a lot of weight, just practice moderation. Don't eat too much and exercise more. Don't let the girl who wrinkled her nose at you or the man who called you "fatty" make you feel worse. Quit turning to food as a coping mechanism. Just care about yourself more and take better care of your body.

It's easy if you know what you're doing.

If you want to fall in love with someone and avoid getting hurt, just let yourself love but not too much. Don't put her on a pedestal and give her a loudspeaker, a direct route through the cyberspatial void between her send key and your heart.

It's easy if you know what you're doing.
