---
layout: post
categories: blogpost
title: Core, Revamped
excerpt: Some thoughts on Mudd's Core and the recent changes
---

On May 8, 2020, the Harvey Mudd faculty voted "overwhelmingly" to approve a new iteration of the Core curriculum: Four courses with optional electivity. This is a massive change for Harvey Mudd and the experience it will provide for its students in the future. The change that is to be implemented is in response to a vast number of concerns about the workload at Harvey Mudd that have themselves led to a number of events throughout my time at Mudd. My freshman year, the Claremont Colleges student newspaper, _The Student Life_, [released a copy](https://tsl.news/news6611/) of a confidential document called the Wabash Report. This report, commissioned by the College’s Teaching and Learning Committee as part of considerations about workload, curriculum, and the honor code, contained a number of harsh and concerning quotations from faculty and students.

A number of these quotations were pulled from the report and posted to a site named ["Mudd is Toxic"](https://sites.google.com/view/muddistoxic/home). I and many of my classmates were struck by this report, and its release was met with a number of student protests that contributed to a tense campus situation. Considering my personal experience with a number of students on campus at the time, sentiments on both sides of the Report still remain: there are students who feel that Mudd pushes too much work on its students and leaves them very little breathing room, while there are other students who feel more comfortable with the Mudd workload and think that it is the responsibility of students who might be struggling to figure out how to adapt and not the other way around.

The report itself, which gathered opinions from students and faculty, noted the pressure students felt to prioritize their technical work over other pursuits. Despite positive comments, the students consistently discussed "the negative impact of Mudd's workload on their growth and development," with the sheer amount of work leaving students little room for longer-term assignments and pursuits beyond what was due the next day. Most faculty were aware of students' struggles, but "there was a divide among the faculty in how they wanted to work with students who were struggling." While some faculty sympathized and believed that Harvey Mudd should change in order to give students more breathing room, a significant number "thought that Harvey Mudd students had, over time, become less capable of, and less interested in, meeting the challenge of Mudd's difficult curriculum." Students had heard and felt this sentiment directly--in particular, the students "had also heard that they weren't as good as Mudd students in the past because there are more women and underrepresented ethnic minorities at Mudd now."

Indeed, I have seen and experienced many of the challenges this report cites firsthand. With the amount of work Mudd students generally have, one thing can go wrong, such as falling sick, and everything "blows up." I remember the severe anxiety I felt when I had to spend multiple hours in the Pomona Valley Hospital ER because of a gash in my head from a fall, mostly because I was wasting hours that I felt I needed to complete my assignments (fortunately, that was during Pass/Fail and I was able to manage).

In some ways, the core was a harrowing experience that shook my faith in myself, my ability to pursue a career in STEM, and any hopes I had of pursuing my education while maintaining a handle on other aspects of my life that were important to me. It wasn't an easy decision at all to quit orchestra because I felt that while I _might_ have had time to go to rehearsals, there was no way I'd have time to put in the practice necessary to make it a worthwhile experience. I also believe some of the comments from faculty in the Report are quite offensive--I believe that teachers do have the right to expect a certain amount of engagement and preparation from their students, but teachers must also recognize that their job is to _teach_. That means understanding that while students should prioritize work as a whole, many students cannot consistently give their best effort while being pulled in a number of different directions for a long period of time.

But things are set to change: now, rather than being steamrolled with a demanding second semester that requires 5 courses + lab, to which most students append an elective for a total of 6 courses, students will only be required to take 4 courses for the duration of Core. The change also makes Differential Equations, previously a part of the Math Core, and Electricity and Magnetism, a Core course infamous for its failure rate, optional. In the new model, "a student can take four courses per term in the first two years and still be on track to graduate on time." The primary goal of the proposal is "to reduce student stress due to context-switching and increase joy, reflection, mastery, and retention by allowing students to take a four-course load in the first three semesters, while still being on track to graduate."

I have already heard worries regarding meeting requirements for particular majors (read: Engineering) from classmates, and wonder how the new curriculum will impact students. In previous years, I heard pushback against the idea of a reduced Core such as the impending version because many Harvey Mudd alumni appreciated the institution's forcing students to "drink from a firehose." This, according to many of those alumni, made them learn skills and habits that served them well later on. Indeed, even recent alumni I spoke with in my first two years who went on to attend grad school or become software engineers at places like Facebook noted "how much more free time they had" compared to their years at Mudd.

I think that this sentiment might linger among some alumni, but many of my classmates and other students of my generation will likely be supportive of the change, especially given the campus climate over the past few years and the tensions regarding student workload. My advisor, among other professors whom I believe to be very receptive to student wellbeing, has often asked students what changes they would like to see in Core and how the workload has affected them. The answers are almost always some flavor of "it was too much." In my personal experience, drinking through a firehose has made many endeavors since that period seem much easier than they might have otherwise (to be fair, those "endeavors" were really just more semesters of classes and summer internships)--even taking 4-5 courses, most of which were quite challenging, along with research, teaching, and leadership duties in a semester felt fairly manageable by the time I was a junior. If this was something Core sought to achieve, it certainly succeeded. But do I feel I retained much information from my semesters in Core? Absolutely not. I'm sure many other students would say similar things.

One of the positive sentiments I have consistently heard uttered about Mudd graduates is their breadth of knowledge, their ability to "jump in" and contribute to almost any sort of work because of the range of expertise that they gained from Core. I can imagine that for a select few students for whom Core was not as much of a challenge as it was for the rest of us, that might ring true. But for many students, myself included, Mudd's Core was a massive step up from the difficulty our high schools provided us with. For example, I and many other students felt that Mudd's introductory Chemistry courses were incredibly difficult. I had taken Chemistry and AP Chemistry during high school (although, to be fair, almost every student at my school who took either class agreed that both moved at a very slow pace and did not teach us very much), but don't feel I understood or retained very much from those two classes. I had the time to complete homework, prepare for quizzes, and sometimes study for tests a little bit in advance, but I did not have time to truly digest the material.

Things changed significantly my junior year--I don't know that the amount of work I did decreased, but I was certainly pulled in fewer directions (this is also a universal experience). I felt far more productive, engaged, and able to digest and retain what I was learning. If the new Core can provide a way for students to feel this way from the start of freshman year while also providing every student with an academic experience challenging enough to promote growth, I'm all for the change. This is indeed a difficult balance to strike, but I believe the "less is more" mentality has been well-considered. With fewer classes, professors can expect more focused time and, hopefully, challenge students with problems and assignments that require long-term thinking and give them the time to truly develop their skills and comfort with the material.

I do hope that future Mudd students who engage with the new Core will experience some of the same growth we did. At the same time, I hope they do not have to struggle with intense and unhealthy levels of self-doubt. I have already written on how Mudd has been an incredibly humbling experience for me, and that while I believe being humbled is an important aspect of growing up, there is a line past which that humility unravels into self-loathing and insecurity. Students should not have to be so paralyzed by insecurity that they are unable to turn to their professors for help or actively pursue experience in whatever field they wish to pursue. They should not feel that they are wasting their professors' time by asking for help or advice. I do not think that we tend to discuss these feelings often when they are in the past and we have managed to overcome them, but the mere fact of their existence is an issue that I hope can be solved. I don't know what Mudd in the future will look like, but I know that the Mudd of the present wishes that its students will confidently ask for help and put their full effort into every pursuit they undertake. Now, we just need an environment conducive to as many of our and Mudd's wishes as possible. 
