---
layout: post
categories: blogpost
title: First Podcast!
excerpt: This was unexpected
---

Rostov just had a _really_ funny outburst. I don't have the full historical context since I haven't studied it enough, but from a quick Google search, Russia has just lost the 1805-1812 battle of Friedland against Napoleon, resulting in a five-year peace treaty. An increasingly agitated Rostov watches Napoleon smugly award Russia's bravest soldier the Legion of Honour, while his wounded friend Denisov is being court-marshalled for stealing supplies. After the fact, with Lazarev in his seat of honor, shining from Napoleon's Midas Touch, Rostov gets drunk and depressed. The awful hospital with its stench of dead flesh comes back to him as he thinks of Emperor Alexander's kind treatment of Napoleon, who offers a forced smile in return. Rostov wonders what all the torn-off arms and legs, all the deaths, were for, with Alexander being so chummy towards the man who commanded such bloodshed? In response to another officers' comment that it was humiliating to look at the French, Rostov says, "how can you judge what would have been best... How can you judge of the actions of the Emperor? What right have we to do any judging? We can't understand the aims or the actions of the Emperor!" He continues to talk to himself: "we're soldiers... If they tell us to die, we die... If his Majesty the Emperor feels like recognizing Bonaparte as an Emperor, and taking him as an ally, that's the way it must be." This makes me wonder if these are the sorts of thoughts that cross the mind of a soldier in any army: soldiers are indeed not diplomats and are subject to the commands, and sometimes whims, of their commanders. Does the constant death, pain, and loss seem to be for nothing when the higher-ups are carousing together as though nothing had happened?

That was totally unrelated--[my first podcast](https://aitalk.podbean.com/e/news-1/) is up today! This has been quite a work in progress. [Skynet Today](www.skynettoday.com), the AI news site I've been writing for, now has a podcast that I've been in charge of selecting articles and writing scripts for. In addition to that long-form podcast, I'm now doing this shorter one in which I talk about a few interesting pieces of news from the past week.

I'm not sure if it'll get many listeners, but I find this really interesting and fun--I hope that if anyone does listen to it, they enjoy it! I don't think I ever expected that I'd have something like a podcast episode out there, and as with many things that at first seem like mountains with their spiraling peaks above the clouds and out of our view, in hindsight it feels like the smallest thing in the world to have done.

There's quite a bit that I'm finding goes into the process of this: you have to figure out what you're going to talk about, write something like a script, do the recording until it's not terrible, then edit. I never quite appreciated the kind of effort that goes into editing a podcast, but after editing 2 test runs and finally the one that's up today, I can imagine that for longer podcasts and other media, it could easily be a Herculean task without automated tools at one's disposal. I managed to find a nice mix, using Audacity for removing breathing sounds and background noises, smoothing audio peaks, normalizing volume, and adding music; and using an online service called [Fix My Levels](https://www.fixmylevels.com/) for a pass at loudness correction that I could iterate on as needed.

I hope to keep this up, and will to the best of my ability because I find it fun. I hope that'll continue to motivate me on this front. Regardless of who or how many people listen to or see the work I'm involved in, I fervently hope that for those who do see it, that work is useful, uplifting, or at least interesting. 
