---
layout: post
categories: blogpost
title: Growing Up
excerpt: And still not knowing what you're doing
---

One of the most striking moments that occurs as someone grows up is when they have the realization that their parents, those esteemed purveyors of nearly everything in the world throughout the years of childhood, are, in fact, not all-knowing. Many children can have an almost ludicrous commitment to the belief that their parents are over and above everything else: I even remember a moment when I was about five years old and argued with my grandparents that my dad was older than them. He had to be--he was over a foot taller!

But there is indeed a point in many people's lives when they realize that their parents, while far more experienced in the vicissitudes and uncertainties of life, are just as clueless as they are about a number of things. I, being fortunate enough to grow up in the US, learned about the ways of life and developed at least some intuition about how people behaved here more quickly than my parents did. While I certainly know much less than my parents, my upbringing and environment differed from theirs enough to expose me to knowledge and ideas that had passed them by.

If it comes early enough, this lesson readies us to receive another one of the masterclasses of adulthood: very few, if any of us, know what we are doing all the time. I certainly do not even consider myself as fully an adult yet, but even being much closer to full-fledged adulthood than I ever was, I cannot say I am in that peaceful, knowledgeable position I had hoped I would be in five years ago. I suppose we all make things up as we go, and perhaps no amount of lecturing can help this phenomenon--no heap of words can ever stand in for the difficult, sudden confrontations of the real world.

An erstwhile child, I often feel that no amount of "experience" will ever leave me bereft of those kiddish attachments, impulses and desires that once consumed my psyche. I am quite sure that ten years from now, I would happily declare myself ready to re-watch the entirety of _Avatar: The Last Airbender_. I still sometimes think of an old stuffed panda who used to be my sleeping companion--he now lives somewhere else in the house, separated from me by a distance I would never have countenanced 17 years ago. But perhaps he enjoys having empty space all to himself.

At a point--still childish, yet having matured at least a little bit, enough to have removed the veil hiding many things that were once secrets to me--I was not quite sure if there is a such thing as adulthood. I have often met young people whose maturity rivals that of seasoned diplomats, while I have seen many a parent who I would, were it not for their large frame, mistake for a child. If there is a such thing as adulthood, it is far from a function of age. It is largely episodes in our lives and our reactions to them that characterize our development, fracture the being that was once within us and present anew, forged in phoenix flames from its muddled parts, a person whose weathered expression bears the weight of contrition, sorrow, joy--a person for whom the firmament above retains none of its former grandiloquence.

Eventually, assuming the world doesn't deafen me with its intentions along the way, I'll be as old as my parents. I can only assume that I will be a very different person with very different perspectives, opinions, and experience from theirs. Indeed, adulthood and the process of growing up will look different for every person. But I think those universal traits that underlie true adulthood are accepting the responsibilities that come with one's place in the world and acting on them, responding to uncertainty with decisive action, and being willing to admit fault, among other things. I think many of us are inclined to give ourselves more credit than is due for some or all of these qualities. I'm not confident that I've matured into something I could call "adulthood" with reasonable certainty just yet, but I hope that with concentrated effort, I'll make it there eventually. 
