---
layout: post
categories: blogpost
title: Weight Loss and Body Image
excerpt: Some thoughts
---

If my morning routine has changed at all over the past four years, there is a vital part of the routine that has not: the weigh-in. Every morning, I take off my pair of navy Crocs, tap my bare right foot somewhere around the front-center on my scale's glassy surface, and step on its cool surface. Its screen wakes, dims for a minute, and shines a bright blue as it displays a number. That number, immutable and tyrranical, will dictate a surprising amount of my day: whether I will allow myself 1500 or 1900 calories, whether I will make _absolutely sure_ that I walk 5+ miles that day or whether I will cut myself some slack.

This morning, my scale informed me that I weigh 152.7 pounds. As with every morning, the number that turns my year into a series of weights rather than a series of dates is transitory, half-true, conditioned on one or twenty factors I may or may not discover. But it has been my judge and jury for as long as I can remember. Four years ago, I visited my Primary Care physician before going off to college. As was tradition for these meetings, I stepped on the scale. But this time, I did not dread the number I was about to see: 164.5 pounds. "How'd you lose the weight?" she queried as she stepped into my room, holding a clipboard that reduced me to a table of numbers and yes/no answers. In that same hour: "Try not to lose any more weight." Whoops.

A year earlier, I stepped on that same scale. 230 pounds. "He's wasting away!" the male nurse said. I had almost thought he was talking about my weight, and was confused because it had gone up. Turns out, the comment was about my sneeze. 230 pounds. I was in a 99th percentile I didn't want to be in. Among boys of my height and age, I was in the top one percent for weight. For years, every visit to my physician included a suggestion: "You should really try losing some weight." 230-pound me didn't care. He pulled up to a McDonald's and ordered a 20-piece Chicken McNugget family meal. The one with two large fries and two large drinks. 90 minutes later, it was gone. 180 minutes later, another empty bag of Flamin' Hot Cheetos left my room.

I'm almost certain it was something that just "cracked"--a fear that I could do nothing about but run away from--that drove me to lose weight during my final semester of high school. In a 180-degree turn, I replaced Five Guys with cabbage soup. I replaced Cold Stone with more cabbage soup. Most days, I ate 500-1000 calories, certain that the larger calorie deficit would help me become healthy sooner. It was a struggle and I almost certainly lost weight too fast, but I made it in the end. I reached O(165) pounds and have maintained a weight around that number ever since.

When I tell the story that way, it almost sounds _too_ easy. In fact, the experience has been anything but. I began taking my health more seriously: I had been a tennis player, but ramped up my exercise level by introducing weightlifting. I learned about macronutrients, discovered what "bro-science" was, and tried to keep up a routine. Educating myself and finding the willpower to actually implement what I was learning certainly enabled me to begin leading a healthier lifestyle, but it also had a nasty side effect: my daily calorie count and body image take up far too much mental real estate.

To this day, I struggle with enjoying food because of a constant fear of calories. I've come to love cooking and trying different cuisines, but that fear has forced a double-sided view of food: a collection of tastes and textures on one hand, and a table of numbers on the other. In a lot of ways, the world of food has become greyer than it used to be. Everything has become a calculation, and at the end of the day I become no more than the result of a series of decisions and arithmetic. My body image has improved marginally, but not very much. I still feel self conscious about my large thighs, my face, and my body hair, among other things. I'm on a long, slow journey towards becoming more at peace with myself, and I hope to make it there one day. 
